#separator:tab
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:C++ Software Design
#tags column:3
Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)	The D in SOLID. Depend on abstractions, not on concrete types or implementation details. In a proper architecture, low-level details depend on high-level abstractions — not the other way around. [Guideline 9]	vocab guideline9
Local inversion of dependencies	When you introduce abstractions between layers but those abstractions still live in the low level — so the high level still depends on the low level. It looks like inversion but isn't. True DIP requires the abstraction to be owned by the high level. [Guideline 9]	vocab guideline9
Ownership of an abstraction	Whichever architectural level defines and ships the abstraction. For DIP to hold, the high level must own its abstractions — low-level code then depends on the high level's requirements, not vice versa. [Guideline 9]	vocab guideline9
What goes wrong when high-level modules depend on low-level modules?	Volatile implementation details control your stable core. Any change to the low level — adding a method, changing a class — forces the high level to recompile, retest, or redeploy even though its logic didn't change. [Guideline 9]	why-it-matters guideline9
Why isn't just introducing an abstraction enough to satisfy DIP?	Ownership matters. If the abstraction lives in the low-level module, the high level still #includes from the low level — the dependency direction hasn't actually changed. True inversion requires the high level to own and define the abstraction. [Guideline 9]	why-it-matters guideline9
How does DIP differ from SRP?	SRP is about keeping components focused on one reason to change — a component-level concern. DIP is an architectural concern: ensuring that the global dependency structure flows from low level toward high level, not the other way. [Guideline 9]	why-it-matters guideline9
An ATM system has Deposit, Withdrawal, and Transfer classes (high level) that all depend directly on a concrete UI class (low level). A new SpeedTransfer transaction requires new UI methods — all existing transactions must recompile. What's wrong and how do you fix it?	The high level depends on the low level — a DIP violation. Introducing a DepositUI, WithdrawalUI, TransferUI abstraction isn't enough if those interfaces live in the low-level module. Fix: move ownership of the UI interfaces up to the high level so Deposit, Withdrawal, Transfer each own the interface they require. Now the UI implementation depends on them, not the other way around. [Guideline 9]	scenario guideline9
A plug-in architecture has a Plugin base class defined inside the third-party (low-level) module. Your Editor includes it from there. What's wrong?	Even though Plugin is an abstraction, it's owned by the low level — your Editor still depends on the third party. Fix: move Plugin into your own (high-level) codebase. Now VimModePlugin depends on your Plugin definition, not the other way around. [Guideline 9]	scenario guideline9
std::copy_if is templated on InputIt, OutputIt, and UnaryPredicate. Who owns the abstraction and what does that mean for DIP?	std::copy_if owns the concepts — it defines what iterators and predicates must satisfy. Containers and lambdas depend on those requirements. That's DIP via templates: the high-level algorithm drives the dependency direction. [Guideline 9]	scenario guideline9
A payment service (high level) includes a header from a third-party payment gateway (low level) to get the IPaymentProvider interface. Deployment of the service requires the gateway team to publish their interface first. What's wrong?	DIP violation — the abstraction is owned by the low level, so the high level is blocked by low-level release cycles. Fix: define IPaymentProvider in the payment service's own module. The gateway team then depends on your interface, not vice versa. [Guideline 9]	scenario guideline9
A notification system defines an INotifier interface in its shared-infrastructure (low-level) library. Business logic modules include it from there. What's wrong and how do you fix it?	Local inversion only — the interface lives in the low level, so business logic still depends downward. Fix: move INotifier into the business logic layer. Infrastructure implementations (EmailNotifier, SMSNotifier) then depend on the business layer's requirements. [Guideline 9]	scenario guideline9
A feature module depends on a Logger class directly from a logging library. Every time the logging library updates its API, the feature module breaks. What principle is violated and what's the fix?	DIP violation — the high-level feature depends on a low-level concrete. Fix: define an ILogger interface inside the feature module. The logging library provides an adapter that implements ILogger. Now the library depends on the feature's abstraction, not vice versa. [Guideline 9]	scenario guideline9
