#separator:tab
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:C++ Software Design
#tags column:3

Software Design	The art of managing interdependencies between software components — minimizing artificial dependencies and introducing necessary abstractions. [Guideline 1]	vocab guideline1

Artificial Dependency	A dependency accidentally introduced through inattention or lack of big-picture thinking — not required by the problem. [Guideline 1]	vocab guideline1

Necessary Dependency	A dependency intrinsic to the problem — unavoidable coupling where different pieces must work together. [Guideline 1]	vocab guideline1

Separation of Concerns	Group only things that truly belong together. Separate everything that changes for different reasons. [Guideline 2]	vocab guideline2

Orthogonality	Two aspects are orthogonal when changing one has zero effect on the other — completely independent directions. [Guideline 2]	vocab guideline2

Single-Responsibility Principle (SRP)	A class should have only one reason to change. [Guideline 2]	vocab guideline2

Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY)	Minimize duplication — every piece of knowledge should have one single authoritative place in the codebase. [Guideline 2]	vocab guideline2

Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)	Clients should not be forced to depend on methods they do not use. [Guideline 3]	vocab guideline3

Open-Closed Principle (OCP)	Software should be open for extension but closed for modification. [Guideline 2]	vocab guideline2

High Level (architecture)	The stable parts of your architecture — core abstractions and business logic that rarely change. [Guideline 2]	vocab guideline2

Low Level (architecture)	The volatile parts of your architecture — implementation details that change more often. [Guideline 2]	vocab guideline2

What goes wrong when you violate the SRP?	A class changes for many unrelated reasons — every change risks a ripple effect across the entire codebase. [Guideline 2]	why-it-matters guideline2

What goes wrong when you violate the ISP?	Clients are forced to depend on things they never use — an unrelated change forces them to recompile, retest, and redeploy. [Guideline 3]	why-it-matters guideline3

What goes wrong when you violate the OCP?	Adding something new forces modification of existing unrelated code — classes that should be untouched are forced to change. [Guideline 2]	why-it-matters guideline2

What goes wrong when high level depends on low level?	Volatile implementation details control your stable core — every change to a library or concrete class ripples up into business logic. [Guideline 2]	why-it-matters guideline2

What goes wrong when you ignore separation of concerns?	A small change cascades unpredictably — a task rated as minor effort becomes a week-long ordeal because unrelated things are coupled. [Guideline 1]	why-it-matters guideline1

A Document class bundles exportToJSON() and serialize() together. A function only needs JSON export. What's wrong and how do you fix it?	SRP violation — two orthogonal concerns are coupled. Fix: split into JSONExportable and Serializable interfaces so clients depend only on what they need. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

A Document class has a serialize() function. All document types (PDF, Word) share a DocumentType enum to tag the byte stream. You add XML. What breaks?	OCP violation — adding XML forces modification of the enum, causing PDF and Word to recompile even though they are unrelated to XML. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

Document.h includes a JSON library header. A User class includes Document.h but never touches JSON. What's the hidden problem?	Physical dependency — User must recompile whenever the JSON library changes, despite having no logical need for it. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

A function exportDocument() takes a Document& but only ever calls exportToJSON(). What's wrong and how do you fix it?	ISP violation — it's forced to depend on ByteStream and serialize() it never uses. Fix: change the parameter to JSONExportable& instead. [Guideline 3]	scenario guideline3

Serialization logic is extracted out of Document into a separate Serialization component. PDF, Word, and XML live independently. Which direction do dependencies now flow and why is that correct?	Low to high — Serialization (low level, volatile) depends on document types (high level, stable). Stable code is never forced to change by volatile code. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

exportToJSON() on Document uses argument types from a specific JSON library in its signature. You want to swap libraries. What's the blast radius?	The signature must change, forcing all callers to update too — the library has leaked into the public interface and spread the dependency far beyond Document itself. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

A UserService class handles user authentication, sends welcome emails, and writes audit logs. What's wrong and how do you fix it?	SRP violation — three unrelated concerns are bundled together. Fix: split into AuthService, EmailService, and AuditLogger so each changes for only one reason. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

A PaymentProcessor interface has processPayment(), generateInvoice(), and sendReceiptEmail(). A module only needs to process payments. What's wrong?	ISP violation — the module is forced to depend on invoicing and email concerns it never uses. Fix: split into PaymentProcessor, InvoiceGenerator, and ReceiptSender. [Guideline 3]	scenario guideline3

A Shape base class has draw() implemented using OpenGL directly. You need to support a second graphics library. What's wrong and how do you fix it?	SRP violation — the shape is coupled to a specific rendering implementation. Fix: extract drawing into a separate concern so the shape itself knows nothing about graphics libraries. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

A config file format changes from JSON to YAML. Every class in the codebase that reads config must be updated. What design problem caused this?	Artificial dependency — concrete config format details leaked into many classes instead of being isolated behind an abstraction. Fix: introduce a Config interface so only one component knows the format. [Guideline 1]	scenario guideline1

A new payment method is added to an e-commerce system. The existing PaymentType enum is shared across all payment classes and must be updated. All existing payment classes recompile. What principle is violated?	OCP — extending the system (adding a new payment method) required modifying existing unrelated code. Fix: remove the shared enum and isolate payment type knowledge behind a abstraction. [Guideline 2]	scenario guideline2

A analytics module depends on a database client library just because it shares a base class with a persistence module. It never queries the database itself. What's the problem?	Physical dependency — the analytics module transitively depends on the database library through an unnecessarily shared base class. Fix: separate the interfaces so analytics only depends on what it actually needs. [Guideline 3]	scenario guideline3