#separator:tab
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:C++ Software Design
#tags column:3
Expression Problem	The fundamental tension in dynamic polymorphism: you can either keep types open (easy to add new types) or keep operations open (easy to add new operations), but not both at the same time. [Guideline 15]	vocab guideline15
Open set (types/operations)	A design axis that is left extensible — new entries can be added without modifying existing code. In dynamic polymorphism, only one axis can be open at a time. [Guideline 15]	vocab guideline15
Closed set (types/operations)	A design axis that is fixed — adding new entries requires modifying existing code. In dynamic polymorphism, one axis must be closed to keep the other open. [Guideline 15]	vocab guideline15
What is the core design tradeoff when using dynamic polymorphism?	You must choose one axis to fix: either fix operations (OOP — open types, closed operations) or fix types (procedural — open operations, closed types). You can't leave both open with dynamic polymorphism. [Guideline 15]	why-it-matters guideline15
Why doesn't static polymorphism (templates/std::variant) suffer from the Expression Problem?	Because both types and operations are fully known at compile time — nothing is dispatched through a vtable that must be fixed in advance. You can freely add new types or new operations without committing to either. [Guideline 15]	why-it-matters guideline15
A reporting system uses a Report base class with a virtual render() method. A new export format is needed. What's the problem and when is it acceptable?	Adding a new operation (export) requires inserting a new virtual function into the base class and updating every derived class — an OCP violation on the operations axis. It's acceptable only if the set of report types is closed and new operations are the primary extension point; then prefer a procedural/Visitor approach instead. [Guideline 15]	scenario guideline15
A notification system has an if/else chain checking a NotificationType enum to call send logic per type. A new channel is added every sprint. What's wrong and how do you fix it?	Types are the open axis but the design treats them as closed — every new channel requires modifying the enum and the if/else chain. Fix: use OOP — give each notification type its own class with a virtual send(), so adding a new channel only requires a new derived class. [Guideline 15]	scenario guideline15
A data pipeline uses std::variant<CSVSource, JSONSource> and std::visit to process each source. A teammate wants to add a new XMLSource type. What has to change?	Add XMLSource to the variant and add a new operator() overload to each existing visitor. The visitor functions themselves don't change — only the new case is added. This is the cost of the open-operations / closed-types tradeoff in the variant approach. [Guideline 15]	scenario guideline15
A teammate says "just use virtual functions everywhere — that way we can always extend later." What's the design risk they're ignoring?	Virtual functions keep types open but lock operations closed — every new operation requires touching the base class and all derived classes. If operations are the primary extension point in that system, OOP is the wrong choice; a procedural or Visitor-based approach would be better. [Guideline 15]	scenario guideline15
An auth system uses std::variant<PasswordAuth, OAuthAuth, SSOAuth> with std::visit for login logic. A new operation (audit logging) needs to be added. What do you do and what's the advantage over OOP here?	Add a new AuditLog visitor struct with operator() for each auth type — no existing code is modified. This is the strength of the open-operations axis: new behavior is added as a new free struct, not by touching a base class. [Guideline 15]	scenario guideline15