#separator:tab
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:C++ Software Design
#tags column:3
What is the real definition of a design pattern?	A name + an intent + some form of abstraction to decouple software entities. Everything else — virtual functions, templates, syntax — is an implementation detail. [Guideline 12]	vocab guideline12
What goes wrong when a developer treats design patterns as a goal?	They apply patterns where none are needed, increasing complexity and harming readability — the opposite of what patterns are for. Other developers get frustrated and may reject patterns altogether. [Guideline 12]	why-it-matters guideline12
What does it mean that design patterns are not limited to dynamic polymorphism?	The same pattern intent can be realized with templates (static polymorphism), function objects, or free functions. e.g. Strategy can be a virtual base class OR a template parameter — the intent is the same, the mechanism is not. [Guideline 12]	why-it-matters guideline12
A senior dev insists that the Strategy pattern requires a virtual base class and an inheritance hierarchy. Are they right?	No — that's the classic GoF implementation, but the intent (swappable algorithms decoupled from context) can be achieved via a template parameter, a function object, or a free function. The pattern is the intent, not the syntax. [Guideline 12]	scenario guideline12
A Loader class directly calls requests.get() inside its load() method to fetch data. What design problem does this create?	It couples Loader to a specific HTTP library, violating SRP — Loader now has two reasons to change: loading logic and HTTP transport. Fix: extract fetching into a separate FetchStrategy so Loader only depends on an abstraction — making it easy to swap in a mock for tests. [Guideline 12]	scenario guideline12
A Loader class uses a virtual FetchStrategy base class to decouple HTTP fetching. A teammate says "rewrite this with a template parameter — it's not Strategy anymore." Are they right?	No. Both are Strategy. The virtual base class version and the template version share the same intent: encapsulate an interchangeable algorithm and decouple it from its context. The implementation differs; the pattern does not. [Guideline 12]	scenario guideline12
A payment service hardcodes Stripe's SDK calls inside its charge() method. A new client needs PayPal support. What's the design problem and fix?	charge() is coupled to Stripe — adding PayPal means modifying existing code, violating OCP. Fix: introduce a PaymentStrategy abstraction so charge() delegates to whichever provider is injected, without knowing which one it is. [Guideline 12]	scenario guideline12
A reporting module directly instantiates a PDFExporter inside its generate() method. A teammate says "just use a template parameter for the exporter." Is this still a design pattern?	Yes — it's still Strategy regardless of whether you use virtual dispatch or a template parameter. The intent is the same: decouple the export algorithm from the reporting logic. The mechanism is just an implementation detail. [Guideline 12]	scenario guideline12
A Python data pipeline passes a transform_fn callable into a process() function. A teammate wants to refactor it into an abstract TransformStrategy base class with a virtual execute() method. Is this worth doing?	Not necessarily — the callable version already IS Strategy. Introducing a class hierarchy adds complexity without changing the intent. Only refactor if you need features inheritance provides (e.g. shared state, LSP guarantees). The pattern is the intent, not the structure. [Guideline 12]	scenario guideline12
A team is adding design patterns to every class in a codebase refactor — Observer for config updates, Strategy for string formatting, Command for simple button clicks. Sprint velocity drops and the code gets harder to follow. What went wrong?	Patterns were treated as a goal, not a tool. Each was applied whether the problem called for it or not, adding unnecessary abstraction layers. A pattern should reduce complexity — if it doesn't, it's the wrong solution. [Guideline 12]	scenario guideline12